5.1 Introduction
It has been said that the other bank of the River Styx is lined with the shades of
dissatisfied testators waiting to receive the judicial personages who have misconstrued
their wills. But more often than not, the blame should fall upon the draftsman whose
unskilful efforts created the necessity for construing the will. The drafting of documents
at all times is an art; in the case of wills, skill in the use of words is not enough—it must
be combined with a thorough knowledge of testamentary law.1 While the draftsman may
adequately provide for the devolution desired by the testator, the form in which the
bequest is made may involve consequences flowing from the law of wills which may have
been neither contemplated nor desired by the testator. For instance, a testator may wish to
appoint his wife as his heir and after her death his children. The draftsman may say
exactly this, with the result that a fideicommissum is created which prevents the wife from
alienating any of the assets or disposing of the capital, whereas all the testator may have
had in mind was that while his wife was to enjoy his estate with complete and unfettered
discretion to do with it as she pleased, his children should take on her death what was left.
This chapter is intended, therefore, to afford some guide as to how wills should be drafted
and to explain the effect of some of the more common forms of bequest, so that the
draftsman can avoid the pitfalls that yawn before him in the drafting of wills.

5.2 General rules
(1) A well-drafted will should be clear to any person who is able to understand a will. It
is essential that not only should the will be understood, but it should also not be
misunderstood.
(2) The will should not be ambiguous. Perhaps the most frequent source of ambiguity is
the fact that the draftsman thinks he is saying one thing when he is really saying more
than one thing or that he is dealing with a simple matter in relation to a particular
situation, whereas in reality it may be subject to unsuspected qualifications or may have
to be applied in unforeseen circumstances or contingencies.
(3) It is, therefore, essential that the draftsman should begin by knowing exactly what
he means to say, what he does not mean to say, and what he does not need to say. Many a
will otherwise well drawn has caused trouble because, although the draftsman has dealt
with a point he had in mind, he has not sufficiently considered the possibilities.
(4) It should go without saying that the draftsman’s language should be in accordance
with the rules of grammar. Long sentences replete with qualifying and relative clauses
should be avoided. Sentences should be as short as is compatible with clarity. While
unnecessary verbiage should be excluded, repetition and tautology are not problematic if
they help to achieve clarity.
(5) The draftsman must be sure that he understands the words he is using, and words
should always be used in the same sense throughout the will. If the draftsman wishes to
change the meaning, the word should be changed or the change of meaning clearly stated.
The draftsman should consider the meaning of the words in their context in case the
intended meaning is modified in that context.
(6) Words which are vague and depend upon their context for their meaning or which
are capable of more than one meaning, for example, money, effects, movables should
either be avoided or precisely defined in the will.
(7) The order of the will should be logical; in this way, the risk of omission or
repetition is minimised. The draftsman should deal with one thing at a time and each point
by itself, for example, he should deal with legacies before residue; when he deals with
income he should exhaust all the points in connection with it before he comes to deal with
the capital.
(8) When provisos or conditions are attached to a bequest, the draftsman should use
paragraphing or clear reference to clarify to which bequest a proviso or condition relates.
(9) The draftsman should use his imagination to visualise all the possible contingencies
and circumstances in which the will may operate, so that his draft will provides for them.
The longer the period of time in which the will is intended to operate, the more
contingencies and possibilities have to be provided for.
(10) The draftsman should have a good knowledge of the practical aspects of winding
up an estate. For example, if the will creates a trust and the income of the trust is
bequeathed to A, A will not be entitled to any income that may be earned on the assets
prior to their award to the trustee after the account has lain for inspection. If it is intended
that he should receive income earned from the date of death of the testator, this should be
specifically provided for in the will.
(11) The draftsman should acquaint himself with the nature and composition of the
estator’s estate in order to ensure that the testator’s intentions are given proper
expression. For example, a testator may instruct the draftsman to bequeath his shares in a
company to his beneficiary, when what he intends is to leave his total interest in the
company, such as shares and loan account.
(12) It is also important for a draftsman to acquaint himself with the international
composition of a testator’s estate. Where, for example a testator might have assets in
numerous jurisdictions, the draftsman must inform the testator that a will can have an
influence on his assets internationally; alternatively, he must clearly state in the will that
this will deals only with the South African-based assets, and that a separate will will be
created in the other jurisdiction to deal with those assets.
(13) Lastly and perhaps most important, the draftsman, when he has completed his
draft, should reconsider it and read it with the eye and mind of a stranger. He should
satisfy himself, before it is too late, that the will means, firstly, what he intends; secondly,
that it does not say anything more or less than what is intended; and thirdly, that it takes
into account all the circumstances that ought to be contemplated. He should as far as
possible adopt the approach of a person who does not wish the document to mean what
the draftsman intends and if such a person could reasonably argue that it does not bear the
intended meaning or that it could bear some other meaning, then the will requires
redrafting.

5.3 The testator’s instructions
Some testators are clear about what they want; others are vague or undecided.
In the first case, the draftsman should explain the legal effect of the testator’s proposed
dispositions so that he is made fully aware of the position and not be under a
misapprehension as to where his dispositions may lead. This is of particular importance
where the testator wishes to tie up his estate for a long period or impose prohibitions upon
the alienation of his assets for one or two or more generations. Too many testators, either
wishing to control their families’ lives from the grave or out of too great an anxiety for the
well-being of the following generations, impose conditions which, in a rapidly changing
world of uncertain economies, may be onerous for those whom they wish to benefit and
who may suffer for the sake of the ultimate generation who inherit outright. It may not be
the duty of the draftsman to dissuade the testator from what he has in mind, but the least
he can do is draw the testator’s attention to the possibilities. This may often lead to some
saving provision in the will that will mitigate any harshness that future events may
otherwise bring about through uncompromising conditions in the will.
In the second case, the draftsman should explain to, and discuss with, the testator the
advantages of each mode of disposition so that the testator can make his choice.
It is not always necessary to know the value of the testator’s estate or what it
comprises, but this information may often prove helpful in advising the testator as to the
best mode of disposition, particularly when large legacies are left and it is borne in mind
that estate duty is payable out of the residue. After the payment of the legacies and estate
duties, there may be little or no residue left for those whom the testator appoints as his
heirs.
If the testator is married, his marital status, whether married in or out of community of
property, should be known, because if he is married in community of property the will
should be precise, when dealing with the particular assets, as to whether he is bequeathing
the whole asset or only his half-share in it.

5.4 Directions and wishes
The draftsman should clearly bear in mind the distinction between a direction by the
testator binding on the beneficiary and a wish or desire. It often happens that a testator
would like his beneficiary to do something without, however, making it a binding
condition. When this is the position, the draftsman should use appropriate language to
indicate this wish or desire. On the other hand, where it is the intention of the testator to
make a bequest or condition, the words ‘wish’ and ‘desire’ should be avoided.
Example
I appoint my sons John and James to be the heirs of my estate.
It is my earnest wish and desire, without however binding my sons in any way, that
they continue the business carried on by me or, if they desire not to do so at any time,
that they pay to each of the employees of the said business a month’s salary as a gift
for the faithful service they have rendered me in their lifetime.

5.5 The beneficiaries
The beneficiaries should be clearly identifiable from the will. A point should be made
to see that their correct names are used and, if there is a possibility of confusion, for
example, a bequest to a relative who bears the same name as another, the beneficiary’s
relationship to the testator or other distinguishing feature, for example, the son of X, a
birthdate, or identity number, should be set out. Addresses may also help, particularly if
the beneficiaries are not known to the executor, whose duty it will be to trace them.
Where bequests are left to institutions, the exact names and descriptions of the
institutions should be ascertained. It is surprising how often the testator gives the wrong
name of an institution or insufficient identification, and in some cases the testator has
benefited an institution that has never existed.

5.6 The bequests
The actual thing bequeathed should be sufficiently and accurately described so as to
leave no ambiguity, for example, a motor car should be described by the make or kind,
licence number, etc.
Land
Land should be described by its title deed number or by its title deed description or
otherwise by its exact situation, for example, street, number or name. Where the
testator wishes to leave a defined portion of land, that portion should be defined in the
will with as much detail as possible so as to avoid a dispute as to what exactly was
bequeathed.
Where the testator wishes to divide up his land, it should be borne in mind that the
Deeds Registry Act and other legislation dealing with land, for example, the
Townships Ordinance, may create insuperable difficulties and, therefore, such bequests
should always be made to conform with them; otherwise, the bequests may be
stultified.
The Subdivision of Agricultural Land Act stipulates that no agricultural land can be
subdivided nor that an undivided share shall vest in any person unless the Minister of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries consents thereto. The effect hereof is that, inter
alia farm property, cannot easily be bequeathed to more than one heir. This can be
pre-empted in a will and the agricultural land can be bequeathed to only one heir
subject to a bequest price in favour of the others, or to a testamentary trust with the
intended heirs being the beneficiaries, or a company with the intended heirs being the
shareholders in such relation as the testator wishes.

5.7 Joint wills and massing
One of the most frequent forms of will is the joint will, particularly for spouses married
in community of property. The law reports are studded with cases where such wills have
had to be construed, the main cause of ambiguity being whether the will effected a
massing or not.
In spite of its form, a joint will is simply a document containing the wills of two or
more persons. It may, according to its form, operate as the will of the first-dying of the
testators only. It may also operate as the will of the surviving testator on his death. If it
does, the survivor is free to revoke it at any time before his death. If, however, the joint
will effects a massing of the estates of both testators then, after the death of the first-dying
testator, the survivor, if he accepts the benefits conferred upon him by the will, that is,
adiates, cannot dispose by later will of his share of the massed estate, although he is free
to make a will in respect of any of his assets that he acquires after the death of the
first-dying and which do not form part of the massed estate.
In order for a will to effect a massing it must be a joint will by the testators jointly
disposing of the property of both, the disposition taking effect after the death of the
survivor, who obtains benefits during his lifetime. It is not essential that the whole of their
estates should be massed; testators can mass a portion only of their estates.
The difficulty in deciding whether a joint will effects a massing or merely disposes of
the share of the first-dying arises very often out of the use of the words ‘our’ and ‘our
estate’. The presumption is against massing and, in the absence of other indications in the
will pointing to massing, ‘our’ will be interpreted as ‘my’, that is, as referring to the share
of the first-dying. The draftsman should make it perfectly clear, therefore, whether it is
intended to mass the joint estate or only to dispose of the first-dying’s share. If the former
is intended, he should say specifically that the spouses mass their estate; if the latter is
intended, he should avoid using the word ‘our’. The draftsman must further consider the
possibility of the donations tax consequences of massing.

5.7.1 Examples of massing
Usufruct to survivor
We hereby mass our joint community estate and bequeath the whole of our massed
joint estate to our children subject to the usufruct of the survivor of us until his or her
death.
Survivor heir subject to fideicommissum
We hereby mass our joint community estate and appoint the survivor of us to be the
heir thereof, subject to the condition that upon the death of the survivor our massed
estate shall devolve upon the children of our marriage then alive and the issue per
stirpes of such children who may have predeceased the survivor leaving issue.
Partial massing
(i) We hereby mass our shares of our farm ‘Doornkloof’ and all the livestock thereon
and bequeath the said farm and livestock to our son John, subject to the usufruct of
the survivor of us during his or her lifetime.
(ii) We appoint the survivor of us as the heir or heiress of the residue of the estate of
the first-dying of us.
Massing combined with a division upon remarriage
We hereby mass our joint community estate and appoint the survivor of us to be the
heir thereof, subject to the following conditions, namely:
(i) Upon the death of the survivor the massed estate shall devolve upon the children of
our marriage then alive and the issue per stirpes of any children who may have
predeceased the survivor leaving issue.
(ii) Should, however, the survivor remarry or enter into a permanent relationship of
care and cohabitation with another, then in that event the massed estate shall be
divided and one-half thereof shall be and remain the sole property of the survivor
and the other half shall devolve upon the children of our marriage then alive and
the lawful issue per stirpes of any children who may have predeceased the date
of the survivor’s remarriage leaving issue.
Massing with fideicommissum residui
We hereby mass our joint community estate and appoint the survivor of us to be the
heir thereof with full powers to alienate and dispose of all or any portion of the said
massed estate during his or her lifetime; subject to the condition that upon the death
of the survivor whatever shall then remain or be left of the said massed estate shall
devolve upon the children of our marriage then alive and the lawful issue per stirpes
of any children who may have predeceased the survivor leaving issue alive at his or
her death.
Massing taking into account donations tax consequence, in community of property
We hereby further determine that, should the bequest of our massed estates have the
effect that more than half of the net value of the survivor’s estate is bequeathed to our
heirs, an interest-free loan is to be made for the difference in value between the
bequests and the value of half of the estate, owing by the heirs to the surviving
spouse.

5.7.2 Examples where no massing
Usufruct to survivor
We appoint the children of our marriage as the heirs of the estate of the first-dying
of us subject to the usufruct of the survivor of us until his or her death or remarriage.
Survivor heir subject to fideicommissum
We appoint the survivor of us to be the heir of the first-dying of us subject to the
condition that upon the death of the survivor the said estate of the first-dying of us
shall devolve upon his or her (alternatively, our) children, and if any child shall have
predeceased the survivor of us his or her share shall devolve upon his or her lawful
issue per stirpes alive at the death of the survivor, or failing such issue, upon the
remaining children and the lawful issue per stirpes alive at the death of the survivor
of any predeceased children.
Survivor and children co-heirs with usufruct to survivor
We appoint the survivor of us together with the children of our marriage to be the
heirs of the first-dying of us, subject to the usufruct of the survivor until his or her
death or remarriage over the portions of the children.

5.7.3 Examples where no massing and joint will also operative upon the death of the
survivor
(i) We appoint the survivor of us to be the sole and universal heir of the estate of the
first-dying.
(ii) The survivor of us appoints the children of our marriage, and in the event of any
of them predeceasing the survivor, their issue per stirpes to be the heirs of the
estate of the survivor.
Alternatively:
(i) We appoint the children of our marriage and, in the event of any child predeceasing
the first-dying, in his place his or her issue per stirpes to be the sole and universal
heirs of the estate of the first-dying, subject to the usufruct of the survivor until his or
her death or remarriage.
(ii) The survivor of us appoints the children of our marriage and in the event of any
child predeceasing the survivor, in his place his or her issue per stirpes to be the
heirs of the estate of the survivor.
Note: The survivor may at any time before or after the death of the first-dying, even
where he has adiated under the will of the first-dying, revoke the will in so far as his
own dispositions are concerned.

5.8 Simultaneous death
It is not unusual for spouses in mutual wills to provide for the eventuality of their dying
simultaneously, having in mind the possibility of an accident in the course of travel. There
is no presumption in our law arising from age or sex as to survivorship, nor is there any
presumption of simultaneous death; the question is one of fact depending upon the
evidence. To overcome this inquiry, the draftsman should provide not only for the
testators’ dying simultaneously but for their dying within a short time of each other.
Moreover, the provision should avoid being construed as creating a fideicommissum with
the survivor as fiduciary should the one testator survive the other but die within the time
limit. The following clause would cover the situation:
‘In the event of our dying simultaneously or in the event of the survivor dying within
(period) after the first-dying then instead of the aforegoing appointment (of heir,
legatees, etc.) we direct etc.’

5.9 Appointment of executors
The testator may appoint as many executors as he pleases. If he appoints more than
one, then unless the will requires a quorum the executors remaining from time to time are
entitled to act. Should the testator desire a quorum, the will should expressly say so. It is
important to note that the nomination of an executor in a will is in essence only a wish of
the testator as empowered by ss 13 and 14 of the Act, and is still subject to the
appointment of the executor by the Master after the testator’s death.
In mutual wills or in the wills of married persons, it is often the case that the survivor is
appointed executor and also given a life interest. This may entail acts of administration
after the death of the survivor, for example, passing transfer of landed property. The
estate will, however, be unrepresented and an executor dative will have to be appointed,
unless the will provides for an executor testamentary upon the death of the first executor.
Whenever, therefore, the estate has to be wound up upon the death of the holder of a life
interest who is also the executor, the will should provide for a further appointment of an
executor. This applies particularly to mutual wills.
Assumption of executors
Executors are frequently given the power to assume another person or persons as
co-executors. Where more than one executor has been appointed and it is desired that
the remaining one or ones should have the power to assume, the will should make it
clear that the power is given not only to the appointed executors jointly but also to the
remaining executors or executor (see 9.5.1).

5.10 Security by executors
Where the executor is not one of the persons exempted by the Act from furnishing
security because of his relationship to the deceased he will have to furnish security for his
administration unless the will exempts him.2
Example
As executor of my will I appoint Tom Jones with all the powers allowed in law and
particularly the power of assumption. I direct that my said executor shall not be required
to furnish security to the Master of the Supreme Court for the due administration of my
estate under any law existing or which may in the future exist.

5.11 Powers of executors
The powers of the executor are circumscribed by law and the will.3 If it is desired to
give the executor specific powers, for example, to enter into leases, carry on business or a
partnership in the course of liquidation, these must be set out in the will.
If the testator wishes to leave to the discretion of his executor which assets should be
sold and how they should be sold, he should set this out in his will; if he does not, the
executor’s powers are not unlimited.4
Example
My executor shall have full power in his discretion to sell all or any of the assets of my
estate and in such manner as he may decide upon, whether by public auction or by private
treaty or otherwise.

5.12 Vesting and substitution
An inheritance or bequest vests in the heir or legatee if he becomes entitled thereto in
the sense that he can transmit his rights to others either during his lifetime or upon his
death. Where there is no vesting in the beneficiary, he acquires no right until the
happening of the event upon which the vesting depends (see 18.12 for a discussion on
vesting of rights and adiation and repudiation).
In the case of an outright unconditional bequest, the beneficiary acquires an
immediately vested right on the death of the testator. Where the enjoyment of the right,
for example, because of an intervening usufructuary interest, is postponed until a future
date, it is often a difficult question—if the draftsman has not expressed himself
clearly—to determine whether the vesting of the right (dies cedit) has also been
postponed or not. Where the intervening life interest is usufructuary, the presumption is
that the vesting is immediate upon the death of the testator and not when the usufruct
comes to an end. However, the will should not leave the matter in doubt and precise
wording should be used either to show that vesting is intended immediately upon death or
is postponed until some future date.
In the case of substitution of other beneficiaries for those who die, it is also a matter of
difficulty sometimes to determine whether the substitution is direct or fideicommissary.
In the former case, if the beneficiary survives, he takes outright and the substitution is
only effective if he predeceases the event; in the latter case, the substituted beneficiary
takes after the death of the original beneficiary who is merely a fiduciary. Here again,
although the presumption is in favour of direct rather than fideicommissary substitution,
the draftsman should clearly express himself. It must be kept in mind that a
fideicommissum—transfer of the property from the fiduciary to the fideicommissary—is
only a spes for the fideicommissary.
It is a simple matter to do so if it is borne in mind that phrases such as ‘after the death’,
‘upon death’, ‘in the event of death of’, ‘if A should die’, ’predecease’, etc are ambiguous
in themselves and that the event to which they relate should always be specified.
Examples
Immediate vesting
Subject to the usufruct of my wife Mary Jones, I appoint my son John as heir of
my estate and in the event of my said son predeceasing me, then his issue per stirpes.
Postponed vesting
Subject to the usufruct of my wife Mary Jones, I appoint as heirs of my estate such
of my children who survive my wife and the lawful issue per stirpes of any child who
may have predeceased my wife leaving issue alive at the death of my wife.
Fideicommissum
I appoint my son John as heir of my estate and upon his death before or after me,
his lawful issue per stirpes.
Predeceasing us
Another fruitful source of ambiguity arises in joint wills where the survivor is given
a life interest and the testators provide for a substitution should a beneficiary
‘predecease us’. It may mean predecease the testator or predecease either testator, with
consequently different results. The draftsman should always say to which one of the
testators the predeceasing refers. If he means the first-dying then he should say so;
equally, if he means that the beneficiary must survive both testators he should make
this clear.
For example, in the first case, ‘in the event of our son John dying before the
first-dying of us’; or in the second case, ‘in the event of our son John dying before the
survivor of us’.

5.13 Bequest to a class of persons
Where a testator bequeaths a legacy to, or appoints as heirs, a class of persons,
problems may arise if the will is not sufficiently explicit as to the time when the members
of that class are to be finally determined. For example, a bequest to the children of a son
immediately raises the issue whether, if the son is alive at the death of the testator, or at
some future date (eg on the death of a usufructuary), the son’s children born after the
death of the testator (or the termination of the usufruct) also share in the bequest. If
after-born children do share, questions arise relating to the distribution of income and the
care and management of the corpus until the full number of children has been determined.
These matters should not be left unexpressed in the will. A bequest to a class should
clearly specify the point at which the class becomes determined and, if that time is after
the death of the testator, the will should deal with the management of the capital and the
distribution or accumulation of the income in the interim.
Examples
(a) I bequeath the sum of R20 000 to be divided among such of the children of my son A
who shall be alive at my death.
(b) I bequeath the sum of R50 000 in trust, the income thereof as and when it
accrues to be distributed among, or used for the benefit of, the children of A
alive at the date of accrual (the issue of a deceased child taking by
representation), and the capital to be distributed at A’s death among the children
of A alive at his death, and the issue by representation of any children who may
have predeceased him.
In an effort to resolve the issue, s 2D(1)(c) of the Wills Act provides that unless the
context otherwise indicates, any benefit allocated to the children of a person, or to the
members of a class of persons, mentioned in the will shall vest in the children, or the
members of the class, alive at the time of the devolution of the benefit, or who have
already been conceived at the time and who are later born alive. The effect of this is
to create a rebuttable presumption that after-born children or members of a class are
excluded, but there is still room for controversy as to whether the context indicates
otherwise. It is better to be explicit than to rely on s 2D of the Wills Act.

5.14 Substitution of beneficiaries
Unless a beneficiary is alive at the date of death of the testator and adiates (ie elects to
take his bequest), the bequest to him does not take effect. In such an event the testator,
had he contemplated it, may well have wanted to substitute someone else, for example,
the beneficiary’s wife or children. Unfortunately this point is only too frequently
overlooked, so much so that the legislature has especially enacted that where a
descendant, whether as a member of a class or otherwise, would have been entitled to a
benefit had he been alive at the testator’s death, or had not been disqualified from
inheriting, or had not renounced his bequest, then his descendants, per stirpes, will
become entitled to the benefit.5 This provision is, however, subject to two provisos. The
first is that the substitution will not follow if the will indicates otherwise.6
The second proviso concerns bequests to any descendant or descendants of the testator
and his surviving spouse. Where this is the case, then whether or not the jus accrescendi
would apply as discussed in 5.15, a renunciation by a descendant results in his share
accruing to the surviving spouse.7 There is no reservation that this result is subject to the
context indicating otherwise. If the testator wants to prevent this result, he must not join
his surviving spouse in the bequests to his descendants.8
Even more important is the question of substitution of beneficiaries when the will
makes provision for the future long after the testator’s death, for example, when vesting is
postponed until the death of the usufructuary, or fideicommissary interests are created for
one or more generations. At least before his death the testator can alter his will to suit
altered circumstances, and precisely because this is not possible after his death and
because the longer the operation of the will the more circumstances have to be provided
for, the draftsman should make proper provision for all contingencies.
Where a will provides that upon the death of the legatee, and if such legatee dies
childless, the property so bequeathed must pass to a third person, but the legatee in fact
dies with children, it is held that the deceased intended that a fideicommissum be created
in favour of the children of the legatee, if the children are also descendants of the testator;
if, however, they are not the descendants of the testator, no tacit fideicommissum is
created.9

5.15 Equal shares and jus accrescendi
When a bequest or inheritance is left to two or more persons and nothing is said as to
how it is to be divided among them, the bequest or inheritance must in law be divided
equally among them. Where this is the intention of the testator, therefore, it is
unnecessary for the will to state it expressly. Where this is done, however, then it must be
borne in mind that the addition of the words ‘in equal shares’ is regarded in law (in the
absence of sufficient indiciae in the will to show that the testator intended the jus
accrescendi to apply, that is, that his share is to go to his co-legatees or co-heirs10) as a
joinder verbis tantum, that is, as an institution of beneficiaries to separate shares; should
one of the beneficiaries die before the vesting of his share, it will, in the case of a legacy,
fall into the residue and, in the case of an inheritance, devolve upon intestacy,11 unless the
testator has substituted other beneficiaries in his place, for example, his issue or the
remaining beneficiaries. Whenever, therefore, any bequest or inheritance is left to more
than one person either in equal or differing shares, portions, fractions or percentages, the
draftsman must bear in mind the effect of any one of them dying before his share vests in
him.
When a bequest or inheritance is left to more than one person without there being any
stipulation as to how it is to be divided among them, then upon the death of one before his
share vests in him, it will devolve upon his co-legatees or co-heirs by the jus accrescendi
unless the testator has expressly substituted someone else for the deceased beneficiary.

5.16 Children and issue
Although the word ‘children’ primarily means descendants in the first degree only,
grandchildren and further descendants may be included if the will lends itself to this
construction. If the draftsman uses the words ‘children’ and ‘issue’ interchangeably, the
latter construction may be placed upon the word ‘children’. If ‘children’ in the sense of
descendants in the first degree is intended, then the draftsman should use that word in that
meaning throughout, and where remoter issue is intended, he should use the word ‘issue’
or ’descendants’. If grandchildren only are intended, that word should be used and ‘issue’
or ‘descendants’ avoided.
Section 2D of the Wills Act 7 of 1953 provides the following, unless the context
otherwise indicates, for the purpose of the will:
Adopted children
An adopted child shall be regarded as being born from his adoptive parent or
parents. So, for example, if the testator makes a bequest to his children, or
descendants, or to the children or descendants of X, the adopted children or
descendants of the testator or X fall under the bequest unless the will indicates the
contrary. On the other hand, where the bequest is to the children or descendants of X,
those natural children or descendants of X who have been adopted by someone else
are excluded, unless the context of the will indicates otherwise. Where the natural
parent is also the adoptive parent, or was married to the adoptive parent at the time of
adoption of the child, this exclusion will not apply. In short, for testamentary
purposes, adopted children are regarded as the children of the adoptive parent and not
as children of the blood parent. A testator who does not want this situation should
deal specifically with the matter in his will.12
Children born out of wedlock
The fact that a person was born out of wedlock shall be ignored in determining his
relationship to the testator or another person for the purpose of the will. For example,
if the testator leaves a bequest to his children, or the children of X, the illegitimate,
adulterous and incestuous children of the testator or X will be included in the bequest.
If the testator does not want this situation, he should deal specifically with the matter
in his will.
Section 4 of the Reform of Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of
Related Matters Act 11 of 2009 provides that, for the purposes of a will of a woman
who had property allotted or accruing to her or her house under customary law by
virtue of her customary marriage, any reference in such will to her child or children in
relation to such a woman, must be construed as including the following:
(a) any child born of a union between the husband of such a woman and another woman
entered into in accordance with customary law for the purpose of providing children
for the first-mentioned woman’s house; or
(b) any child born to a woman to whom the first-mentioned woman was married
under customary law for the purpose of providing children for the first-mentioned
woman’s house.

5.17 Habitatio (occupation) rights
Testators often direct that a beneficiary should have the right to occupy a house, flat or
similar premises. The common-law rights and obligations of the beneficiary are dealt with
in 25.17, but it would be preferable for the will to detail the rights that the testator wishes
to confer and the obligations he wishes to impose. This is particularly so in the case of
premises held under sectional or share block title. The levy imposed by the body
corporate on owners relates to a number of components and it is an open question as to
how much of the levy under common law should be apportioned to the owner and how
much to the beneficiary.

5.18 Per stirpes and per capita
‘Per stirpes’ means a distribution by representation or families, for example, where a
bequest is left to the issue per stirpes of A and B, one-half must be divided among the
children of A and one-half among the children of B. If any child has died leaving children,
those children will receive the share their parent would have received had he been alive to
take.
‘Per capita’ means a distribution in equal shares among the persons entitled to take, for
example, where a bequest is left to the children per capita of A and B, all the children of
A and B share the bequest equally.

5.19 Legacies and prelegacies
Legacies, unless the will can be so construed, are not payable in any order of
preference, nor do ‘special’ legacies, that is, legacies of things, take precedence over
‘general’ legacies of money;13 nor does the order in which they are set out in the will
create any precedence. The result is that if the estate is insufficient to pay all the legacies
in full, each must abate pro rata. If it is the testator’s intention that there should be an
order of precedence, the draftsman should expressly say so.
Example
(a) I bequeath as a prelegacy to my wife the sum of R20 000.
(b) I bequeath the following legacies to be paid to the legatees in the order of
precedence set out—
(i) to my daughter Jane the sum of R10 000;
(ii) to my daughter Mary the sum of R5 000;
(iii) to my son John the sum of R5 000.
(c) After payment of the above legacies I bequeath to each of my nephews and
nieces the sum of R1 000.

5.20 Liabilities attached to bequeathed property
A beneficiary is entitled to the property bequeathed to him free from any liabilities or
burdens upon it, unless the will indicates the contrary. Thus, if a house over which there
exists a bond, or an insurance policy on which the deceased in his lifetime took a loan, is
bequeathed, it is the executor’s duty to use the residue to free the house from the bond or
pay over the full proceeds of the policy to the beneficiary without deducting the loan,
unless the will has provided to the contrary.14
It may be the intention of a testator when bequeathing burdened property that the
beneficiary should receive the property as burdened, but often that intention is not
expressed in the will because it is taken for granted that this result will follow. The
draftsman will do well by his client, therefore, if at the time of taking instructions he
ascertains whether any intended bequest is burdened with a liability and, if so, points out
the effect of such bequest without any direction as to who is to bear the liability.

5.21 Fideicommissum or usufruct
Both fideicommissum and usufruct have as their object the enjoyment by the fiduciary
or the usufructuary of the fruits of the estate or the asset during their lifetimes or until the
event contemplated by the testator, but not of the capital which is to devolve upon the
beneficiaries chosen by the testator. They differ, however, in their legal incidence in that,
firstly, the fiduciary is the legal owner of the assets subject to the obligation of passing
them on to the fideicommissaries when the fideicommissum ceases, whereas in the case of
usufruct the legal owner is (unless vesting has been postponed, in which case ownership
remains vested in the testator’s estate) the ultimate heir of the property, but the
usufructuary is entitled (unless the testator has provided otherwise) to control and
possession of the property during his usufruct. Secondly, if the fideicommissum fails for
any reason, for example, the fideicommissaries predecease the fiduciary, the fiduciary
obtains automatically and by law ownership of the property free from any condition of
fideicommissum, whereas the usufructuary cannot become owner of the property, unless
he is substituted as beneficiary for any heir who predeceases the date of vesting.
Without specific provision in the will neither the usufructuary nor the fiduciary can
alienate the capital.15 In the case of the fiduciary, the property can only be alienated with
the consent of the major fideicommissaries and the consent of the court in the case of
minors or undetermined beneficiaries,16 or with the sanction of the court where certain
circumstances exist.17 In the case of the usufructuary, only the ultimate heirs to the
property can sell, minors only with the consent of the court (or the Master),18 and in the
case of unborn issue with the consent of the court. If the testator contemplates the
possibility of selling the property, and this is particularly desirable where the life interest
is likely to endure for a considerable period, special provision must be made in the will
authorising the sale of the property by the fiduciary or usufructuary.
The question of repairs and in the case of farms, improvements, fencing, etc also
presents a problem. The property cannot be mortgaged in order to raise a loan to effect
these, except on the same conditions as in the case of sale, unless the will expressly
authorises mortgage. Here again the testator should be made aware of the position in case
he wishes to provide for such contingencies.
Another aspect that should be dealt with in a will is the liability of the usufructuary to
pay, in the case of the occupation of property held by the deceased under sectional title,
the levy required by the corporate body, particularly where a portion of the levy relates to
renovations and other expenditure not directly connected with the usufructuary property.
A fideicommissary bequest should not be unfairly discriminatory; where, for example,
a will provides that women cannot be fideicommissaries, it will be regarded as pro non
scripto.19
Example
(a) I bequeath to my son John my farm Doornkloof held by me under Deed of Transfer
No. 1671 dated 14 March 1981, subject to the condition that upon his death the said farm
shall devolve upon his issue then alive per stirpes. I direct that my said son John shall be
entitled to sell the said farm in which event the proceeds thereof shall be subject also to
the condition of fideicommissum in favour of his issue. I also direct that my said son John
shall be entitled to mortgage the said farm but to no greater extent than R100 000 for the
purpose of effecting such repairs or improvements to the farm as he may deem necessary.
(b) I bequeath to my wife Mary Smith the right to occupy my house No. 23 Broad
Street, Cape Town. If for any reason whatsoever she shall no longer desire to live
in the said house, my executor shall when called upon to do so by my wife, sell the
house and in their discretion (alternatively, in the discretion of my wife) invest the
proceeds in another house or in income-producing investments and pay the
income thereof to my wife.
Often it is a matter of small consequence to the testator whether he bequeaths a life
interest by way of usufruct or fideicommissum. In such a case the incidence of estate duty
may be the deciding factor, particularly where the estate is a large one.

5.22 Fideicommissum residui
Where the testator wishes his heir to enjoy full rights of ownership subject only to the
condition that whatever may be left at his death should devolve upon someone else, this
can be done by way of fideicommissum residui.
20 The point to be remembered is that it
must be made clear that the fiduciary is entitled to use the estate in his lifetime; merely to
give him the power of alienation may be construed as only the right to convert the estate
without the right to use the capital. The law also presumes that where the fiduciary is
given the right to dispose of capital, he must restore at least one-quarter of the estate to the
fideicommissaries.21 If the testator does not want this limitation placed upon the
fiduciary, appropriate words should be used to make this clear.
Example
We appoint the survivor of us to be the sole and universal heir of the first-dying with full
and absolute power to alienate all or any portion of the estate subject to the condition that
upon the death of the survivor whatever (if anything) shall then be left of the estate shall
devolve upon the children of our marriage then alive and the issue per stirpes of any child
who may have predeceased the survivor leaving issue.

5.23 Prohibitions and forfeitures
It has happened often enough that a will has contained a prohibition against a
beneficiary dealing with his bequest in a particular way, for example, alienating or
mortgaging the property, or a condition that a beneficiary will lose his rights in certain
circumstances, for example, on his insolvency, and yet in the event such prohibition or
forfeiture has proved ineffective. This is because the draftsman omitted to provide for a
‘gift over’ on the breach of the condition by the beneficiary. A prohibition or forfeiture is
in itself ineffective unless it becomes enforceable against the beneficiary penalised and it
can only be enforced if the will provides for a substitution of another beneficiary on the
breach of the condition. If there is no substitution or ‘gift over’ the prohibition or
forfeiture is said to be ‘nude’—such a nudum praeceptum will have no effect. Where
there is a ‘gift over’ it is usually by way of fideicommissum.
Example of a nude prohibition
I bequeath my farm to my son John subject to the condition that he shall not be entitled to
alienate or mortgage it.
Examples of effective prohibitions
(a) I bequeath my farm to my son John subject to the condition that he shall not be
entitled to alienate or mortgage it and upon his death it shall devolve upon his
children.
(b) If before his inheritance shall have been paid him any of my children shall cede
or pledge his inheritance or in any way assign his rights under this will or
become insolvent, then such child shall immediately forfeit and lose his share of
my estate whether of capital or income; and my trustees shall apply the income,
which would have devolved upon such child, to the maintenance of the children
of such child until the termination of the trust and upon such termination to pay
to them the share of capital which would have been payable to such child.

5.24 Minor’s portion
The share of a minor beneficiary may be retained by his natural guardian if the will so
directs and exempts him from security.22 In the absence of such exemption, the natural
guardian cannot retain the minor’s share without security. If he cannot give security, any
money awarded to the minors must be deposited in the Guardian’s Fund. Where there is
no natural guardian, moneys due to a minor must be deposited in the Guardian’s Fund,
unless the will provides otherwise.
Example
If any beneficiary shall be a minor my trustees shall retain his or her share and invest it in
any assets they deem fit and use so much of the income and capital as they deem
necessary for his maintenance, education and well-being and shall pay him the capital and
any accumulated income when he reaches the age of 18.

5.25 Collation
Collation is an obligation imposed by law on the descendants of a deceased who inherit
to account to the estate for the purpose of distributions for certain kinds of gifts received
from or debts owing to the deceased (see 18.18 et seq). The obligation is based on the
assumption that the deceased intended equality in the distribution. Consequently, a
testator may expressly or by implication dispense with collation by all or any of the heirs.
To avoid any doubt, a testator may in his will direct what should be collated or he may
direct that there should be no collation. I caution that where it is a debt owing to the
testator which would have had to be collated but for the dispensation by the testator,
SARS may claim that para 12(5) of the Eighth Schedule requires the heirs to pay capital
gains tax on the face value of the debt. It is advised that a loan should be dealt with by a
testator in his will as a debt, and that the testator should not attempt to deal with it by way
of collation.

5.26 Ambiguous words and phrases
It is impossible to even attempt to give an exhaustive list of words and phrases which
create ambiguity. If the draftsman follows the general rules set out at the beginning of the
chapter there will be less chance of ambiguity, and vagueness can and always should be
avoided by preciseness of expression and, if necessary, by definition. The following
words and phrases have been more or less commonly used and have given rise to
difficulties in construction.
5.26.1 Business
The use of this word may create doubt as to whether only the goodwill is bequeathed or
all the assets of the business, or the assets together with the liabilities. The draftsman
should specify in exact terms what the beneficiary is to receive and what obligations he is
to undertake when he is bequeathed a ‘business’.
Where a business takes the form of a registered company, the testator should keep in
mind that he can bequeath his shares to the said company in his will. A testator should shy
away from attempting to bequeath specific assets in the company.
5.26.2 Dying childless
These words may mean either dying without having had a child or dying without
leaving a child surviving. The draftsman should, therefore, not use them, but set out
exactly what is intended, for example:
I appoint my daughter as my heir subject to the condition that upon her death after me
her inheritance shall devolve upon her brothers and sisters if she leaves no children
surviving her; or,
I appoint my daughter as my heir subject to the condition that upon her death after me,
her inheritance shall devolve upon her brothers or sisters if she shall not have had any
children.
In the first example, it should be noted, there is a fideicommissum in favour of the
brothers and sisters which will only fail if the daughter dies leaving a child surviving
her.23 Whether the fideicommissum fails or not cannot be determined until the daughter’s
death, for it is at that time only that the condition is fulfilled or not, and, consequently, the
daughter is not free to deal with the property. In the second example, the moment the
daughter has a child the fideicommissum fails and she becomes absolute owner, even if
she dies leaving no children surviving.
5.26.3 Family
Various meanings can be ascribed to this word and, depending upon the context, it may
be given a wide or narrow construction. It should never be used without the limits of the
family being defined.
5.26.4 Free of taxes or duties
It is better to specify exactly what taxes or duties the bequest is to be free of, rather than
to use a comprehensive term such as ‘free of taxes or duties’ or ‘free of all charges and
duties’.
When an annuity is bequeathed ‘free of tax’, the draftsman should make it clear as to
what tax is meant, and whether that freedom relates only to South African taxes or also to
taxes imposed by other governments. Moreover, the words ‘free of tax’ create this
ambiguity, namely: whether the tax must be calculated as if the annuitant had no other
income but the annuity, or whether the estate must pay that proportion of the total tax
payable by the annuitant as the annuity bears to his total income, or whether the estate
must pay the difference between the annuitant’s total tax with the annuity and the tax he
would have paid without the annuity. All these constructions have in particular cases been
adopted by the courts and the latter two interpretations can often have serious
consequences for the estate. The draftsman should, therefore, always explain the exact
extent of the tax which the estate must bear.
5.26.5 Issue
This word usually means descendants to any degree. If, therefore, the draftsman means
children or grandchildren he should use these words in preference to ‘issue’.
5.26.6 Money
This word is ambiguous; it has been construed in some cases as confined to cash and in
others as covering all kinds of assets. It should never be used without qualification or
definition. If the draftsman does use it, he should enumerate the things it is intended to
cover, for example, money in banking accounts or post offices or savings banks.
5.26.7 Personal effects
These words, too, may give rise to doubt as to what exactly is intended, and the
draftsman should enumerate the articles or types of articles comprehended in the bequest
rather than use this term without qualification.
5.26.8 Predecease or dying
These words, as has been mentioned earlier,24 should always have the event to which
they relate added, for example, ‘predecease me’ or ‘dying after the survivor’.

5.27 Trusts and trustees (administrators)
The creation of a trust by testators has become increasingly favoured because it makes
for flexibility of administration and can allow for unforeseen changes in circumstances
which the more rigid forms of fideicommissum or usufruct cannot provide. It also often
provides greater security not only in respect of the capital and its ultimate devolution but
also in ensuring that the testator’s wishes are properly carried out. Within the framework
of a trust the testator can clothe his trustees with a variety of powers and discretions.
A trust is created by bequeathing the subject matter of the trust to a person or persons
whom the Administration of Estates Act now calls trustee/s instead of administrator/s, to
be held by him or them in trust for the purposes and subject to the powers and conditions
set out in the will.
The usual trust provides for the distribution of income during the period of the trust and
the devolution of the capital at its termination, the powers and duties of the trustees in
relation to the administration and distribution of the estate, and particularly the disposal
and investment of the assets.
A trust can be a very effective mechanism for ringfencing maintenance obligations
towards a child or a spouse, by preventing abuse by the spouse or child and having the
assets managed by the trustees.
Care needs to be taken that the powers conferred upon the trustee do not amount to a
delegation of testamentary power. Our law does not recognise such a delegation; for
example, power conferred upon a trustee which leaves him at large to determine the
devolution of the estate or the identity of the beneficiaries. In Braun v Blann and Botha
NNO and Another25 the Appellate Division held as valid a power conferred upon trustees
to appoint in their discretion the income beneficiaries from a group of persons designated
by the testatrix, as well as the power to appoint the capital beneficiaries from a group of
persons designated by the testatrix. However, it held as invalid a power given to the
trustees in a certain contingency to create a new trust for her great-grandchildren and in so
doing to appoint trustees to decide on vital terms regarding the determination of payments
of income and/or capital entirely within the trustees’ discretion. These powers are
nevertheless frequently desired by testators who do not wish to ‘rule from the grave’ and
their wishes could be validly served by creating an inter vivos trust or trusts and making
bequests to the trustees of such trusts. The Appellate Division has held that a bequest to
an inter vivos trust is not a bequest by incorporation of a document not executed with the
formalities of a will.26

5.28 Appointment of trustees
An executor is not a trustee and while it may be possible for the terms of a particular
will to construe the word ‘executor’ as including ‘trustee’, it is better expressly to appoint
a trustee. The same persons may be appointed executors and trustees.
As a trust lasts usually for some period of time, there should be some provision for
successors to the original trustees when they cease to be such by death or otherwise. In the
absence of a provision for such substitution, a new trustee will have to be appointed by
the court.
5.28.1 Security
A trustee must furnish security unless he falls within the class of persons which the
Trust Property Control Act exempts from security,27 or the will exempts him.
5.28.2 Powers
The trustee derives his authority and powers from the will.28 They may be limited or as
wide as possible and the will should, therefore, expressly indicate what powers the
trustees are to have.
5.28.3 Investments
Where the testator has prescribed the securities in which the funds are to be invested
the trustees are bound thereby; the court may authorise alternative investments if the
circumstances referred to in the Trust Property Control Act are present.29 If he wishes, the
testator can empower his trustees to invest in any type of asset or he can give them an
absolute or limited discretion.30
Wills frequently set out the powers of trustees in detail greater than is necessary, for
example, to open and operate banking accounts; to sign transfer forms; to appear before
the Registrar of Deeds, and so on. These powers flow, it is submitted, from the office of
trustee and the nature of the investments etc, and need not be detailed if the general
powers conferred upon the trustees are wide enough.
Example
The trustees shall have the fullest and widest power to contract and to invest and reinvest
as they would have were they acting for themselves and in particular, but without
limitation upon the generality of their powers, they shall have power:
1. to realise any movable or immovable property by public auction, private treaty or
howsoever and upon such terms and conditions as they shall deem fit and upon such
terms and conditions as they think fit to acquire movable or immovable property of
any kind whatsoever;
2. 3. to carry on any business whatsoever alone or in partnership or howsoever;
to build or improve any property;
4. to bind themselves in their capacity as trustees as sureties, guarantors and
co-principal debtors in respect of the debts or obligations of any person or
company and to secure such suretyships and guarantees by mortgage or pledge of
all or any assets of my estate;
5. to borrow any money for any purpose whatsoever including, without limiting the
generality thereof, the purpose of advancing the same to any beneficiary with or
without security and with or without charging interest, and to mortgage or pledge
all or any of the assets of my estate as security therefor;
6. to enter into any contracts of whatsoever kind or nature.

5.29 International estates and offshore assets
It is becoming more common for people to have multi-jurisdictional estates, whether
due to immigration or the diversification of their investments, whereby they hold assets in
both South Africa and offshore. The question that arises is whether a single South African
will is sufficient to cover the worldwide assets, or whether a separate will should be
drafted in each country. Unfortunately, there is no standard answer, as each country has
its own laws and rules relating to the recognition of foreign wills, succession rules, and
the devolution of assets, and which assets are governed by a bequest or the nomination of
beneficiaries. When faced with this issue, the draftsperson must consider the international
private law pertaining to the succession rules of the other country such as matrimonial
property regimes, forced heirship and testamentary freedom, whether the foreign
jurisdiction will accept the South African will, whether the foreign jurisdiction will
recognise the South African executor and their rules of probate, whether both movables
and immovables can be bequeathed by a will, language differences, and double estate
duty agreements.31
If it is established that the laws of the other country will not accept a South African
will, or that it may be easier to have multiple wills for practical reasons, care should be
taken to ensure that the multiple wills align with each other, and that they do not
contradict each other, revoke each other, or create ambiguity by dealing with the same
assets.
Example
I revoke, cancel and annul all previous South African wills, codicils and other
testamentary writings and declare this to be my last will concerning my South African
assets. I declare that this will does not deal with any of my assets in any other country and
does not revoke any of my wills in any other country.

5.30 Islamic wills
Where a Muslim person wishes his estate to devolve in terms of Islamic law, he can
either draft his will to accord with the devolution of assets as would be required by
Islamic law, or he can draft his will to provide that upon his death, his executor can
request an Islamic legal expert or Islamic institution to provide a distribution certificate
which reflects the beneficiaries’ and heirs’ shares in terms of the Islamic law of
succession.32 An Islamic will often makes provision for the payment of religious debts
and obligations.
Example
The residue of my estate will devolve in accordance with the Islamic Law of Succession.
For these purposes my Executor shall obtain a certificate executed by an expert on Islamic
Law or by an Islamic Jurist appointed by the Jamiatul Ulama South Africa setting out who
my lawful heirs are and the inheritance to which they are entitled in accordance with the
Islamic Law of Succession.
Alternatively:
The residue of my estate will devolve upon my spouse and children in accordance
with the Islamic Law of Succession. For these purposes my Executor shall obtain a
certificate executed by an expert on Islamic Law or by an Islamic Jurist appointed by
the Jamiatul Ulama South Africa setting out the inheritance to which they are entitled
in accordance with the Islamic Law of Succession.

5.31 Living wills
A living will is a document in which a person makes a declaration or directive in
advance or anticipation wherein he refuses certain medical attention or treatments in
certain circumstances, should he become incompetent or unable to make such decisions,
such as being kept alive artificially, or the administration of certain medicines. It can
include a person’s wishes, requests, values and beliefs.
A living will must not be confused with a will and should also not be included in the
body of a will. Where a will speaks to the testator’s wishes upon his death, a living will
speaks to the deponent’s wishes when he is still alive, but when he is not competent any
longer to reproduce those wishes. Although there are no legal transcripts or statutes that
regulate the living will, it can be argued that the living will finds its recognition in the
common-law doctrine of informed consent as well as each individual’s right to dignity.
Living wills have not been found by any court to be either enforceable or unenforceable.33
The Health Professions Council of South Africa has issued certain ethical guidelines
regarding the legal enforceability of living wills. Statutory intervention is, however,
recommended.